Title: A deer on ice
Date: 2013-05-17
Tags: django, djangocon
Summary: A lightening talk about the fear of joining in, given at DjangoCon Europe in May 2013
Category: Talks

<iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/66555533" width="730" height="455" frameborder="0" webkitallowfullscreen mozallowfullscreen allowfullscreen></iframe>

### Transcript

Hello.

Um.

My name is Mark Steadman, and sometimes I feel - like certainly now - like a
deer on ice, just kind of panicking, scrabbling around.

I'm on my own here in Poland, I'm blind, so this is all quite a fun little
experience trying to get my head around the place, and I'm going to try and
battle through this really quickly as time is of the essence.

One of the really nice things I've discovered about Poland is that I really like
pierogis. And this is a cat that looks like a pierogi.

![Pierogi cat](http://www.highplainssigh.com/images/pierogi.jpg)

So obviously that's got to be done.

Don't clap, you're eating up my time!

But I have a problem, obviously. I suck at people stuff. I'm really bad; I can
sort of manage like a group of 5, 10 people maybe, and after that I just start
to panic and everything just becomes "huh?" and I'm really frightened and geeky
and scared and shy.

And that also means that I kind of suck at communities. I've been doing a fair
bit on the web for ages and have never really been part of anything. So to give
you a little bit of background: I've been using Django since around 2009. In
2010 I was number 6 in Django Dash, and that was a project that I was basically
the sort of lead solo guy; all the other guys were teams. And also I built in
2008 and refactored something called TweetPaste which got used by the Guardian
in the UK and was recognised by Twitter.

So I say this not as some kind of boasting thing. I'm merely trying to say that
I do stuff, but I'm sort of really crap at being... at joining in.

The thing I'm doing at the moment is something called Nymbol, and it's a mobile
CMS for physical objects. And I've got a toolset that I've built called Bambu
Tools, and it's basically just this gargantuan list of reusable apps that do
basically... I had a raft of ideas for ages, of stuff that I wanted to build and
I would have all these little ideas, and I started building up this massive
toolset that meant I could just go bang out an idea and all I had to build was
the idea itself. And if I wanted to productise that or commoditise it, I could
really easily, because I had everything, theoretically in place without much
configuration.

And the problem is, I'm kind of a nice guy, right? I try and do things the right
way. But we have some issues. So please don't attack me when I say that I've got
these things, there's no internationalisation which means there's no
localisation, there's no documentation, there aren't any tests; there's all
these things wrong with it, and that's simply because I haven't yet been at the
stage where I'm thinking I want to contribute to the community; this is just
stuff that's run for me.

Now I know that that's kind of unacceptable, but what I'm sort of trying to do
now is to stop doing it wrong and to start making a promise, and so I wanted to
make a little promise.

This is a little video I made ages ago and it incapsulated this feeling of hope
and if you give hope a helping hand, then it can achieve some awesome things. So
there's been a lot of talk at this conference about how the Django community and
Python communities are fantastic and inclusive and there are great things we
can do and I want to really be a part of that, so obviously I've signed up for
the introduction to committing tomorrow, at the sprints, so I'm going to do my
utmost to be a real, functioning, valuable member of the community. So thank you
very much.
